---
title: Rust Community == Awesome!
---

When I started learning Rust I was a bit worried that the library situation
could be a problem, because the standard library is so lean you could call it
*luaesque*, and where other languages had multiple competing libraries to do
stuff, there was at best one library that did it right, but more often than not
zero or more unfinished libraries.

Still, I distinctly remember being in awe at the considerate language design,
so I continued my forays. I soon learned that while the community was fairly
small and working on many fronts to expand the fledgling ecosystem, they were
also very adroit, friendly and helpful. I've tried to emulate this stance (and
I hope it has worked out all right so far) in my interactions with the
community.

The Rust Community is an awesome bunch.

I was recently reminded of this when writing a (still secret) project, and
wanted to use a small database to persist data between two processes. I
initially thought sqlite was perfect for the job, so I was about to add
[rusqlite](https://github.com/jgallagher/rusqlite) to my dependencies when I
noticed the following tweet:

> Diesel's query builder is now faster than a SQL string literal.
>
> — Sean Griffin on
> [twitter](https://twitter.com/sgrif/status/722228823308107777)

A nice type-safe API *and* performance improvements? Where can I sign up? But
before I did so, I wanted to make sure [Diesel](http://diesel.rs) could fit my
use case. The thing I wanted was a relation between two entities (that could be
stored as simple `String`s) where rows should be unique. So sqlite's `INSERT OR
REPLACE` statements would be the obvious solution (Another would be to set a
handler that would silently drop statements that would fail the constraint, but
I'd probably struggle to make that work).

Anyway, I opened an issue at the Diesel github that was promptly closed because
it was a duplicate of another (that had quite different wording, so I missed it
in my search) – along with a message by Sean Griffin that it was going to be
fixed within the next days (and in fact only a few hours later there is a
work-in-progress [PR](https://github.com/diesel-rs/diesel/pull/297/files) that
appears to do exactly what I wanted. Excellent!)

Another thing happened when I revisited the Rust 
[benchmarksgame](http://benchmarksgame.alioth.debian.org/) 
[entries](https://github.com/TeXitoi/benchmarksgame-rs) and found that
[regex](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/regex) now has a `regex::bytes`
submodule that is capable to match and replace stuff on byte slices. So I tried 
to [incorporate](https://github.com/TeXitoi/benchmarksgame-rs/issues/31) this
into the `regex_dna` benchmark, but found out that it performed worse than the
`&str` version, despite getting rid of the Unicode check.

So I pinged [Andrew Gallant](http://burntsushi.net), the original author of the 
`regex` crate, and he found and fixed the problem in the matter of hours. So 
with the next release, the benchmark will likely get a bit faster still (I'm 
waiting on a [crates.io](https://crates.io) release to keep the `Makefile` 
simple). Cool!

So this is how the Rust community wins despite its small size and incomplete
ecosystem: By being ridiculously active, friendly, helpful and forthcoming. 
This post is basically a big **THANK YOU** to the awesome Rust developers out 
there. You know who you are.
