---
title: cargo install clippy
---

Today, I am happy to announce that you can just copy the title of this blog
post to your command line and provided you have a nightly rust, you'll be able
to `cargo clippy`. The former `cargo-clippy` project is thereby superceded.

For those who want to see the works, here's the 
[PR](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy/pull/681#issuecomment-218370283)
by the unstoppable oli-obk.

Since my [last announcement](/2016/02/05/hundred-sequel.html) we have added
a good number of lints, and even 
[removed](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy/pull/795) four because
specialization made them obsolete. We are now at 147 lints (and counting the
open PRs, we'll reach 150 soon).

Those lints now include the 
[`float_arithmetic`](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy/wiki#float_arithmetic)
and
[`integer_arithmetic`](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy/wiki#integer_arithmetic)
lints, our first "dogme" lints (as 
[suggested](https://twitter.com/graydon_pub/status/695048766622011392) by 
Patrick Walton). More will follow.

Also I started the [metacollect](https://github.com/llogiq/metacollect) crate
(which unfortunately isn't progressing as fast as I'd liked) that will 
hopefully enable us to get more information across crates boundaries. In the
meantime, `rustc` has grown its own output (that DXR uses) we may be able to
use to implement more lints.

We have added some format-based lints (`suspicious_assignment_formatting`,
`suspicious_else_formatting`), and the first lint to check rustdoc 
(`doc_markdown`).

Not only have we added more lints, our existing lints have improved. We've
reduced the number of false positives, made the reporting more consistent and
improved a number of suggestions.

The recent update of Rust's error reporting output will also introduce some
changes in clippy (probably for the better), which will come during the next
weeks. Set `RUST_NEW_ERROR_FORMAT=true` on the command line to try it.

So I hope that clippy has been useful to you, and would like to hear from you.
In the spirit of the recent trend to survey people for their opinion, here's a
[survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1k0wuWgGwDhuUL3q_cONGVxQ6PJSYq5JRZOHKc0itLbg/viewform?c=0&w=1)
about how you use clippy, and what you like or dislike.
